Hi and welcome to this video on function arguments and mutability in particular we're going to look
at how our variables may or may not be affected by functions when we call them and pass all variables
to them and mutability immutability is really important in that context.
So just as an example and as a refresher from the last video remember that strings for example in Python
are immutable objects.
So once a string has been created the object can never be changed.
So if we have this code my VAR equals Hello.
The only way to change my version is to point it to a different object in memory.
So for example let's say my valid points to some object that memory address a thousand that happens
to be the string hello.
The only way for my VAR to get a different value is for us to point my VAR to a different object in
memory.
We can never modify the contents of the object at that memory address 1000 because it's a string and
strings are immutable.
OK.
So let's take a look at.
Then why immutable objects are generally safe from unintended side effects and by side effects.
I mean that if we call a function with all variable then that function may or may not alter the value
of our variable if we have immutable objects.
We have a general amount of safety.
So let's take a look at that.
Let's say we have this function here called process and it takes in a parameter s and it's going to
modify that parameter by concatenating world onto it.
So let's say in our main code now we define a variable My current set it equal to this literal string
Hello.
So we have scopes right.
We have basically two scopes in this example.
We have the scope of our module and then we also have a scope that's the scope of this process function.
So when we run my verticals hello.
Then the module scope has a variable called my VAR and it points to some object in memory.
This object right here and memory address 1000 let's say when we run this piece of code process my van.
We are calling the process function the process method and we are passing my VAR as the argument which
means that my vast reference and this is really important.
The reference is passed to process.
So my van's reference a thousand in this case is passed into process and the process scope now stores
that reference in the variable s so s points to the same object in memory.
Right now when we run this piece of code here as equals s plus world we are not going to be modifying
the contents of the object because it's a string it's immutable.
So the only way that can now be equal to Hello World is for us to create a new object in memory.
Hello world.
Add some different memory address and then the reference of S is going to change.
S is no longer going to point to hello.
It's going to point to this new object.
Hello world.
So you'll notice that in the module scope my Vols reference hasn't changed.
It's still pointing to Hello.
In the process scope S has now changed its pointer from hello hello world.
So now in our main module when we print my there well what is my VAR my VAR is still this reference
over here.
And so when we print my voucher we actually print out Hello.
So as you can see because the string is immutable we have safety nets we pass the string to a function
and that function can never change the value of that string.
So that's what I mean by saying that mutable objects immutable objects are safe from unintended side
effects but of course if you remember our discussion from the last video we've got to be a little careful
with that especially with like contain a style object like a tuple for example even though tuples are
immutable there elements may be mutable.
So we'll get to that in a minute but let's first take a look at a you know what happens when we have
a mutable variable and why we don't have safety in that scenario.
So let's say that we have this function now process which takes a list and it's going to append a value
to that list and let's say in our module code we have my list equals this list 1 2 3.
So again let's look at the scopes we have module scope and process scope.
So my list points to some object in memory which is a list at some memory address 1000.
Now when we call process passing in my list we're essentially again passing the reference to my list
right to the process method.
So my lists reference thousand in this case gets passed to process now.
Ls t therefore which is the local variable here to process and the process scope points to the same
object.
Just like we had with the string before.
Nothing has changed so far.
Everything is the same but not what happens when we run this line right here inside the process method.
We append 100.
For what object are we appending 100 to.
While the object that we're currently pointing to that ls t currently points to which is this one over
here.
And therefore when we run that line of code our list has changed.
Right.
It has mutated the contents of the list has changed the memory address has not changed it's still the
same object.
We've just changed its state.
So now when we print my list well my list is still referencing that object here.
So when we print that out you'll notice that the list is now one to three one hundred.
In other words before we call the function my list was 1 to 3 after the function has finished running
our list was modified by the function.
So that's what I mean by a side effect.
Right.
That process method actually change the state of our variable.
So mutable objects are not safe from unintended side effects.
So whenever you can use immutable objects it's safer to do so.
Now let's just take a look at that tuple example that we had in the last video which is an immutable
collection object right.
Tuples you cannot add remove or replace elements in a tuple but the elements themselves can be immutable.
So let's take a look at this function again our process functions going to take in a tuple and I'm assuming
here that the first element of the tuple is going to be a list.
So we're going to grab the first element of T and we're going to append 3 to it.
Now in our main module code we have this tuple here which has two elements.
The first one is a list.
The second one is a string string is immutable.
The list however is not.
It is a mutable object.
So again we have scopes.
So in our model scope we have my tuple which points to some object in memory which has two elements.
First one is that list.
Second one is that string when we call process my tuple.
Well my tuples reference is being passed to process.
So now the process scope has this variable t that points to the same object.
When we run this line of code t 0 append 3 we've just modified the object over here we've added three
to that list.
Right.
Which is the first element inside the tuple.
You'll notice that the memory address of the tuple stayed the same.
That hasn't changed what has changed is the contents of the first element because it was a mutable object.
So now when we print my tuple while my tuple is full referencing that object it has changed.
Right.
So it is now one two three comma A.
So very similar to what we saw in the previous video.
All right so let's take a look at some code and let's just see how this works in practice.
So let's create a method that's going to modify its argument.
So we'll start with the strings so we'll start by examining immutable objects.
So let's write this method that we saw before their process.
Now what I'm going to do in this method is actually print out the memory address of the variables as
we go along.
So here I'm going to print the initial S memory address equals that and will pass and we'll just do
the ID of S K so we'll stick with the decimal version.
The base 10 version and now we're going to modify s by concatenating whatever s was with let's say world.
And I'm going to print again what that value is for s.
So let's call that final s Ok.
So that's our function.
It's basically going to modify s and we're going to print the memory address of a of S before we modifieds
and after we modify.
So remember we should see two different memory addresses because s is a string.
It's immutable.
So therefore the only way to modify S is to point it to a different object.
So let's say we have my VAR equals Hello k and we're going to print the memory address of Hello.
So we're going to say my the memory address I'll use a pound sign to indicate a memory address and we'll
print the ID of my vote.
OK.
So as you can see that's the memory address of my valve.
Now we can call process of my van.
OK.
And you'll notice that the initial memory address that was received here is the same.
So this memory address here is the same as my.
But you'll notice that after we've modified as the memory address is different.
And in fact the idea of my check now.
It is still the original memory address of my VAR right.
Which was this one here.
This one here and this one here that hasn't changed and therefore the value of my VAR hasn't changed
either.
It is still Hello even though at before process finished running s was now hello world.
But it was at a different memory address.
So let's look at the example where we have a mutable object.
So let's call the Swon modify list and we'll take him a list that say LS team and we're going to do
the same thing here.
I'm going to just copy and paste this code actually I'll copy and paste everything and I'll rename this
LS team
now here we're not concatenating we're going to say LSD the art of penned let's append let's say the
value 100 K and then we'll modify this as well.
Just fix up for the parameter name in the method.
OK so now we have this method created that will modify the list.
But notice I'm using this append which means that we're going to be modifying the object's state.
OK.
So now if I have a variable called my list let's say one to three.
We can look at the ID of my list so we can see the idea of my list is some number here.
When we call modify a list of and pass in my list pass in that reference to my list then you can see
that initially right.
What was received in modified lists this memory address is the same as my list.
And after we finished appending you'll notice that the memory address of that list is still the same
so no memory address references have changed.
They stayed the same.
And in fact ID of my list
is still the same.
Right.
It ends in 2 6 3 2.
So we're still dealing with the same object.
So throughout this entire set of code here we were dealing with the same object.
And if we print out my list you'll notice that it was changed so within modified my list in our main
code we've modified my list inside this function here.
And because lists aren't mutable objects it is possible to modify what we pass into a function from
within the function because it's a shared reference remember shared references from a while back.
Well this is what's happened here.
So mutable objects do not have the safety right strings are safe right.
They're not going to be changed are integers.
Same thing any numbers right.
Any any mutable object is not safe and any immutable object is safe to a certain degree.
So let's take a look at the total example.
Right.
So let's go ahead and say modified to pull so will pass in a tuple T.
And again I'm just going to take all this code here and we'll look.
We'll print the memory address of T.
Now tuples you cannot modify tuples.
There is no apparent method to tuples but I'm going to assume that the first element of the tuple is
a list.
So I'm going to take the first element of T and append 100 to it and then we'll print out the memory
address of t again k.
So there we go.
And now let's write my tuple equals one comma two.
So the first element of my tuple is a list and let's say the next element is a string.
OK.
So we have an ID on my tuple.
That's the memory address.
Now keep in mind the tuple itself is immutable.
But in this case the first element of the tuple is mutable.
So when we call modified tuple and pass in T.
Look what happens the memory address of T.
Oh sorry not to delete that modify tuple of my tuple.
OK.
So the memory address of my tuple which was received here is t is the same as my tuple and after we
finished appending the value to the first element the memory address stays the same.
The tuple hasn't changed.
Right.
The tuples memory address is still the same.
What has changed is the first element of the tuple.
So if we print my tuple out you'll notice that the first element now had 100 appended to that list.
So again this is why you know you have to be a little careful when you say that immutable elements cannot
change.
Yes that is true.
The immutable object the tuple object cannot change in the sense that you cannot modify the elements
that the containment of elements in that tuple.
In other words you cannot add remove or replace elements in the tuple.
But if the element in the tuple is mutable then you can certainly change its value in place.
And so in effect from a programmer's perspective the tuples value has changed.
Right.
So be careful.
Immutability does not necessarily mean that nothing can change.
It can.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.